# From Original Data Sets To One Tidy Data

### explains how all of the scripts work and how they are connected.

================================================================
### As we are provided, the data sets containing subjects, activity names and measures on dimensions of activities (i.e. 561 dimensions)are divided separately into Test data set and Train data set.
### We are asked to aggregate these separate data sets into a complete one by extracting only parts of variables we want.
### I wrote scripts to generate it. The steps and scripts are as follows, describing the process how i read,subset,merge and transform these data sets into a complete one.
================================================================
## Step 1: Preparation for tidy data
### First read in activity names and their measures we need for merging purpose later, both for Test set and Train set.

variables=read.table("./UCI HAR Dataset/features.txt",sep="")
activity=read.table("./UCI HAR Dataset/activity_labels.txt",sep="")

## Step 2: Read in Test set data.
### 1. Load the file of subjects_test, and rename column to "Subject".
### 2. Load the file of X_test, and rename its columns with "variables" we prepared in step 1.
### 3. Load the file of Y_test, and rename column to "Activity".

testsubject=read.table("./UCI HAR Dataset/test/subject_test.txt"
                       ,sep="",col.names="Subject")
xtest=read.table("./UCI HAR Dataset/test/X_test.txt",sep=""
                 ,col.names=variables[,2])
ytest=read.table("./UCI HAR Dataset/test/Y_test.txt",sep=""
                 ,col.names="Activity")
                 
## 4. Extract from "xtest"(i.e.561 dimensions of activities) only measures on mean or standard deviation for each variable. 
## 5. Fetching variable name containing word of "mean" or "std" by grep function, we get a vector of integer column numbers. We then subset from "xtest" these columns with this criteria.

meanvar1=grep("mean",names(xtest)); stdvar1=grep("std",names(xtest))
xtest1=xtest[,meanvar1]; xtest2=xtest[,stdvar1]

## 6.Merge subjects,activity name codes and activity dimensions which are measures on mean or SD into one named "Test".

Test=cbind(testsubject,ytest,xtest1,xtest2)

# Step 3: Read in Train set data.
## 1. Load the file of "subjects_train", and rename column to "Subject".
## 2. Load the file of "X_train", and rename its columns with "variables" we prepared in step 1.
## 3. Load the file of "Y_train"", and rename column to "Activity".

trainsubject=read.table("./UCI HAR Dataset/train/subject_train.txt",sep="",col.names="Subject")
xtrain=read.table("./UCI HAR Dataset/train/X_train.txt",sep=""
                  ,col.names=variables[,2])
ytrain=read.table("./UCI HAR Dataset/train/Y_train.txt",sep=""
                  ,col.names="Activity")
                  
## 4. Extract from "xtrain"(i.e.561 dimensions of activities) only measures on mean or standard deviation for each variable. 
## 5. Fetching column names containing word of "mean" or "std" by grep function, we get a vector of integer column numbers. We then subset from "xtrain" these columns using this criteria

meanvar2=grep("mean",names(xtrain));stdvar2=grep("std"
            ,names(xtrain))
xtrain1=xtrain[,meanvar2];xtrain2=xtrain[,stdvar2]

## 6. Merge respondants,activity name codes and activity dimensions which are measures on mean or SD into one named Test set.

Train=cbind(trainsubject,ytrain,xtrain1,xtrain2)

# Step 4:Merge "Test" set and "Train" set to form a complete data set named "TestTrain".

TestTrain=rbind(Test,Train)
   
# Step 5:Uses descriptive activity names to name the activities in the data set
## We use "Activity" prepared in step 1 to name the activity names by factor function.
TestTrain$Activity=factor(TestTrain$Activity,levels=activity[,1]
                          ,labels=activity[,2])
   
# Step 6:Appropriately labels the data set with descriptive 
## variable names. Because the columns' names are capitalized, we need to change into lowercases.
tobereplaced=tolower(names(TestTrain))
tobereplaced=gsub("\\.","",tobereplaced)
variables$lower=tolower(variables[,2])
variables$lower=gsub("-","",variables$lower)
variables$lower=sub("\\()","",variables$lower)
variables=variables[variables$lower%in%tobereplaced,]
variables$V2=as.character(variables$V2)
tobereplaced=c(c("Subject","Activity"),variables[,2])
colnames(TestTrain)=tobereplaced

# Step 7 Creates a second, independent tidy data set with the average 
## of each variable for each activity and each subject.
group=list(TestTrain$Subject,TestTrain$Activity)
tidydata=aggregate(TestTrain,group,mean)
tidydata$Subject=tidydata$Activity=NULL
colnames(tidydata)=tobereplaced

# Final step: write out the data generated by above procedure.
write.table(tidydata,file="tidydata.txt",row.names=F)

